---
layout: article 
title:  "Tibetan Independence" 
contributorId: '3'
date: 2018-07-05 
categories: article
month: July
dateDisp: "2018-07-05"
firstArticle: '4'
secondArticle: '5'
thirdArticle: '8'
fourthArticle: '1'
fifthArticle: '2'
aID: '7'
link: 'https://niche-news.github.io/article/tibetan-independence.html'
author: 'Charlie Davis'
---

Tibet is a mountainous region of western China. According to China, the land has been Chinese since the 13th century. However, periodically during this period, Tibet has exercised independence from China. For example, between 1368 and 1644, and more recently between 1912 and 1951 China exercised no control over Tibet. According to The New York Times, “Tibet was not “Chinese” until Mao Zedong’s armies marched in and made it so” in 1951 (New York Times). The most recent Chinese occupation of Tibet, beginning in 1951, has been one characterized by oppression and human rights abuses. This oppression has mainly been focused on repressing the practice of Tibetan Buddhism and on maintaining an economic and political grip on Tibet. This Chinese control threatens to destroy Tibet economically and culturally (UMASS). In response to this oppression, a Tibetan independence movement has developed, with the split goal of Tibetan autonomy or independence (NYT, China Warns). However, the question of Tibetan control is problematic because Chinese occupation of Tibet instigates conflict with India, and has historically been the instigator of wars between China and India (DNA). This escalates the question of Tibetan independence from a local conflict to a matter of global security that threatens to instigate a much larger war. 

China’s oppression of Buddhists in Tibet is the primary motive behind the independence movement. Nearly 97% of Tibetans are Buddhist (IMB), yet, since taking control of Tibet, China has pulled down more than 99% of Tibetan monasteries, and imposed control over the religion. Current president Xi Jinping has taken a hard stance on religion and has further allowed oppression through “canceling previously permitted festivals, increasing intrusive restrictions on private religious practice, and more proactively manipulating Tibetan Buddhist doctrine and the selection of religious leaders”(Central Tibetan Administration). In recent years 100,000 Tibetan refugees have fled Tibet to India to escape oppression and live with the Dalai Lama, their spiritual leader (UMASS). When Tibetans responded to this oppression in 2008 with massive revolts the Chinese government responded with “an intensive crackdown” (NEWINT), killing 200 Tibetans, injuring 1,300 and detaining 7000(NYT). This Tibetan religious discontent mixed with the oppressive strongman politics of China create an environment fostering pro-Tibetan revolutionaries.

A Chinese occupation of Tibet enables China to stockpile weapons on its border with India, creating massive tensions in international politics. In 1962 India went to war with China over Tibet in the Sino-Indian war (DNA). India was defeated in this war, setting the stage for modern Chinese occupation of Tibet. However, the war failed to resolve the territorial dispute between the two nations. China has used their occupation of Tibet to systematically construct road and rail networks along the Chinese Indian border that tilt the balance of forces in China’s favor. India has responded with increased armament on their side of the border. China has also used the excuse of putting down rebellion to position huge amounts of troops in Tibet, troops that could potentially be used to fight China. Further escalating the conflict is “China’s reported deployment in Tibet of nuclear missiles targeting India”(FP). This increased armament on both sides of the Indian Chinese border has ultimately resulted in a Sino-Indian arms race. This is particularly problematic because when a mature conflict between two nations becomes an arms race the probability of war increases by 331%(Political Science). As The Huffington Post explains “Even a small border clash between these two assertive giants could light the fuse of a broad and very frightening conflict” that would create “yet more conflict in Central Asia and the Gulf”(HP). Ultimately, the Sino Indian arms race resulting from Chinese control of Tibet threatens to create a massive international conflict.

The best solution to this problem is ultimately the diplomatic creation of an independent and open door Tibet. Any effort to make Tibet independent has to be diplomatic because a military effort will inevitably fail. The Chinese government feels that “if they don’t completely crush any form of protest they will lose control of Tibetans, said Executive Director of International Campaign for Tibet”(ICT). This Chinese sentiment dooms any Tibetan revolts against the massive Chinese army. In order for the Tibet movement to be successful, it would have to be overwhelmingly supported by the international community. China is incredibly unlikely to let Tibet be independent unless it is in their best interest to. This would be achieved through economic and political coercion from the entire international community. The new independent Tibet would also need to have open, free market borders for there to be any chance of independence. “Tibet’s waters are the lifeblood of the most populous continent on the planet, Asia. Hundreds of millions depend [...] on water flowing from Tibet”(PE). In the status quo, Tibetan water flows openly into China. As Planet Experts explains “The key to environmental protection is empowering communities to protect it. And that is the key problem in Tibet, where locals have no power”(PE). The Chinese fear is therefore that by giving Tibetans power over their own water the Tibetans would stop the flow of Tibetan water into China. This would be massively destructive however because “Forty-six percent of the world’s population depends upon rivers originating in Tibet”(Future Directions). China would crush any Tibetan independence movement if it could not ensure that it would still have access to the Tibetan resources. The Chinese governments resistance will be the primary force working against an independent Tibet but by using diplomacy and by guaranteeing China protected water rights Tibet could ultimately gain its independence. 

Tibetan people have been oppressed by the Chinese government since 1951. The Chinese Government continues to repress Tibetan Buddhism through strongman politics and force while at the same time exploiting Tibet for military advantage over India. As long as China is in control of Tibet there can be no solution to Sino Indian relations. Chinese occupation threatens to instigate a war between India and Indian allies and China and Chinese allies. This war would be massively destructive but could be avoided if Tibet was given its independence, thereby moving Chinese aggression away from the Chinese-Indian border. Tibetan independence could only succeed as an international diplomatic effort because of China’s unwillingness to give in to Tibetan resistance. An independent Tibet could also never exist if it threatens China’s lifeline water supply. Yet, despite these potential problems with an independent Tibet ultimately solving the Tibetan question will decrease international tension and protect human rights in Tibet. 